---
layout: post
title: Stop telling people to 'Read the Fucking Manual'
---
1. TOC
{:toc}

# The problem
Googling a problem often returns a forum thread that runs like so:

> Original Poster: I have this problem.  
> First Responder: This is in the manual. Why can't you just read the manual?

I'm usually quite annoyed at First Responder, because *I* have the same problem as OP, and First Responder *isn't helping*.
I find this extra annoying because I do read the manual first, and I had to go online for the answer too.
The answer First Responder should be getting is: *because the manual is huge and badly written*.

Now I must admit that "badly" is an imprecise term.
`man` pages are usually concise, thorough, and nicely formatted.
These are not hallmarks of *bad* writing.

The problem is that software manuals are commonly written as *references*, not as *explanations*.

A reference is meant to be searchable above all things.
Ideas are organized alphabetically, and broken into broad categories if you are lucky.

An explanation, on the other hand, is meant to build layers of understanding.
Concepts are placed such that sections build upon each other, and the reader is never left saying "you've used a lot of big words there, and I have no idea what any of them mean".

# Case study: the Arch Package Manager

For instance, the Arch Linux package manager (pacman) is documented in three different places:
1. the commandline help, accesible through `pacman -h`
2. the `pacman(8)` man page
3. the [Arch wiki, pacman](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Pacman) page

The commandline help is a terse list of supported operations and one-line descriptions of options.

The man page obeys the same structure, but it provides a full paragraph of explanation for each item, and it documents pacman's configuration file.

The wiki page is a living source of documentation, meant to be read roughly top-to-bottom.
It is split into four headers: Usage, Configuration, Troubleshooting, and See also.
It should speak volumes that the Usage section starts by disclaiming that this is not a comprehensive resource, that the manual page *is*, points to an online copy of the manual page, and immediately after *explains what a package is*.

Annoyingly, the commandline help does not mention the existence of the man page, which in turn does not mention the existence of the wiki page.
The reverse is true, which is better than nothing, but is still inadequate.

# Why is this a thing?
The rationale for this state of affairs is obvious enough: the man page tells you about the commandline help *because it can guarantee it exists*.
As long as pacman is installed, you will have access to the commandline help.

The reverse is not true.
It is perfectly possible to have pacman installed without its man pages, or even the `man` utility at all.
This goes doubly so for the wiki page: nothing you can do from your computer can guarantee an online resource will be available.
Thus, since it can make no guarantees, `pacman -h` stays silent about the other docs.

While this reasoning does makes sense, it is *absolutely backwards* from a usability standpoint.

The only docs a user is guaranteed to have explain *none* of the core terms (package, group, meta package, dependency), don't even *mention* the configuration file, and provide *no* pointers to further resources.
A user that does not already know what is what, or where to find more information, is stuck with going online and getting told to RTFM by First Responder.

# How to fix it
Here's a cheap fix:
accept broken pointers.
The man page may not be available, but *it doesn't matter*, tell the user about it anyway.
The wiki may not be available, but *it doesn't matter*, tell the user about it anyway.
If the user *needs* to read something to understand how to use your software, then it *isn't optional* and it's *your job* to provide it.

The better solution is to make sure your help system tells your users everything they need to know in order to use your software.
This is definitely an achievable goal:
[git-help is a case study in good documentation]({% post_url 2021-11-03-git-help %}).

